README.md, before:

# Fake News Detection System

[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.8+-blue.svg)](https://python.org)
[![scikit-learn](https://img.shields.io/badge/scikit--learn-1.0+-orange.svg)](https://scikit-learn.org)
[![Accuracy](https://img.shields.io/badge/Accuracy-95%25-brightgreen.svg)](#performance)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](LICENSE)
[![Hugging Face](https://img.shields.io/badge/Demo-Hugging%20Face-yellow.svg)](https://huggingface.co/spaces)

> **An end-to-end ML pipeline achieving 95% accuracy on 20K+ articles, with 70% latency reduction through model optimization. Deployed on GCP Cloud Run with auto-scaling.**

## Live Demo

[Try the Live Demo on Hugging Face Spaces](https://huggingface.co/spaces) *(Coming Soon)*

![Fake News Detection Demo](images/demo.gif)

## Key Results

| Metric | Value |
|--------|-------|
| **Accuracy** | 95% on test set |
| **Dataset Size** | 20,000+ articles |
| **Latency Reduction** | 70% through optimization |
| **Precision Improvement** | 15% via custom features |

## Problem Statement

Misinformation spreads 6x faster than true news on social media. This project provides a machine learning solution to automatically classify news articles as **Real** or **Fake**, helping users make informed decisions.

## Architecture

```
+------------------+     +------------------+     +------------------+
|   Raw Article    | --> |   Preprocessing  | --> |  Feature Engine  |
|   (Text Input)   |     |   (Clean/Token)  |     |  (TF-IDF/NLP)    |
+------------------+     +------------------+     +--------+---------+
                                                          |
                                                          v
+------------------+     +------------------+     +------------------+
|    Prediction    | <-- |  Logistic Reg.   | <-- |  Model Training  |
|   (Real/Fake)    |     |  (Optimized)     |     |  (Grid Search)   |
+------------------+     +------------------+     +------------------+
```

## Tech Stack

| Category | Technologies |
|----------|-------------|
| **ML/AI** | scikit-learn, NLTK, TF-IDF, Logistic Regression |
| **NLP** | Tokenization, Stemming, n-grams |
| **Backend** | Python, Flask |
| **Cloud** | GCP Cloud Run, Docker |
| **Data** | Pandas, NumPy |

## Performance Comparison

| Model | Accuracy | F1 Score | Training Time |
|-------|----------|----------|---------------|
| Naive Bayes | 72% | 0.71 | 2s |
| SVM | 89% | 0.88 | 45s |
| Random Forest | 91% | 0.90 | 120s |
| **Logistic Regression** | **95%** | **0.94** | **15s** |

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites
- Python 3.8+
- pip

### Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/Rahul-2k4/Fake_news_Detection.git
cd Fake_news_Detection

# Create virtual environment
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # Windows: venv\Scripts\activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Training the Model

```bash
# Run the complete pipeline
python classifier.py
```

### Making Predictions

```bash
# Interactive prediction
python prediction.py

# Enter a news headline when prompted
> "Scientists discover new planet in solar system"
> Prediction: REAL (Probability: 0.87)
```

## Dataset

Using the **LIAR Dataset** - a benchmark for fake news detection:

- **Source**: ACL 2017 Paper by William Yang Wang
- **Size**: 12,800 labeled statements
- **Classes**: 6 (simplified to 2: Real/Fake)

| Original Label | Mapped To |
|----------------|-----------|
| True, Mostly-true, Half-true | Real |
| Barely-true, False, Pants-fire | Fake |

## Feature Engineering

1. **Text Preprocessing**: Tokenization, lowercasing, stopword removal
2. **TF-IDF Vectorization**: Captures word importance
3. **N-grams**: Unigrams and bigrams for context
4. **Custom Features**: 
   - Sentiment scores
   - Punctuation patterns
   - Capitalization ratio

## Model Selection

After evaluating multiple classifiers using GridSearchCV:

```python
# Best performing model
LogisticRegression(
    C=1.0,
    penalty='l2',
    solver='lbfgs',
    max_iter=1000
)
```

## Deployment

### Local Flask Server

```bash
python front.py
# Access at http://localhost:5000
```

### Docker

```bash
docker build -t fake-news-detector .
docker run -p 5000:5000 fake-news-detector
```

### GCP Cloud Run

```bash
gcloud run deploy fake-news-detector \
  --image gcr.io/PROJECT_ID/fake-news-detector \
  --platform managed \
  --allow-unauthenticated
```

## Project Structure

```
Fake_news_Detection/
├── DataPrep.py           # Data preprocessing
├── FeatureSelection.py   # Feature engineering
├── classifier.py         # Model training & evaluation
├── prediction.py         # CLI prediction interface
├── front.py              # Flask web interface
├── final_model.sav       # Trained model
├── liar_dataset/         # Original dataset
├── images/               # Visualizations
├── requirements.txt
└── README.md
```

## Learning Curves

![Learning Curve](images/LR_LCurve.PNG)

## Future Improvements

- [ ] Deploy to Hugging Face Spaces for live demo
- [ ] Add BERT-based embeddings for better accuracy
- [ ] Implement real-time news verification API
- [ ] Add source credibility scoring

## Citations

```bibtex
@inproceedings{wang2017liar,
  title={"Liar, Liar Pants on Fire": A New Benchmark Dataset for Fake News Detection},
  author={Wang, William Yang},
  booktitle={ACL},
  year={2017}
}
```

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

## Author

**Rahul Tripathi**
- GitHub: [@Rahul-2k4](https://github.com/Rahul-2k4)
- LinkedIn: [rahul-tripathi-335347353](https://linkedin.com/in/rahul-tripathi-335347353)
- Email: rahultripathi7009@gmail.com

---

*Fighting misinformation with machine learning*

Commit message:

Update README with live Hugging Face Spaces demo link

README.md, after:

# Fake News Detection System

[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.8+-blue.svg)](https://python.org)
[![scikit-learn](https://img.shields.io/badge/scikit--learn-1.0+-orange.svg)](https://scikit-learn.org)
[![Accuracy](https://img.shields.io/badge/Accuracy-95%25-brightgreen.svg)](#performance)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](LICENSE)
[![Hugging Face](https://img.shields.io/badge/🤗%20Live%20Demo-Hugging%20Face-yellow.svg)](https://huggingface.co/spaces/Rahul7009/fake-news-detection)

> **An end-to-end ML pipeline achieving 95% accuracy on 20K+ articles, with 70% latency reduction through model optimization. Deployed on GCP Cloud Run with auto-scaling.**

## Live Demo

🚀 **[Try the Live Demo on Hugging Face Spaces](https://huggingface.co/spaces/Rahul7009/fake-news-detection)**

Simply paste any news article or headline and get instant predictions with confidence scores!

![Fake News Detection Demo](images/demo.gif)

## Key Results

| Metric | Value |
|--------|-------|
| **Accuracy** | 95% on test set |
| **Dataset Size** | 20,000+ articles |
| **Latency Reduction** | 70% through optimization |
| **Precision Improvement** | 15% via custom features |

## Problem Statement

Misinformation spreads 6x faster than true news on social media. This project provides a machine learning solution to automatically classify news articles as **Real** or **Fake**, helping users make informed decisions.

## Architecture

```
+------------------+     +------------------+     +------------------+
|   Raw Article    | --> |   Preprocessing  | --> |  Feature Engine  |
|   (Text Input)   |     |   (Clean/Token)  |     |  (TF-IDF/NLP)    |
+------------------+     +------------------+     +--------+---------+
                                                          |
                                                          v
+------------------+     +------------------+     +------------------+
|    Prediction    | <-- |  Logistic Reg.   | <-- |  Model Training  |
|   (Real/Fake)    |     |  (Optimized)     |     |  (Grid Search)   |
+------------------+     +------------------+     +------------------+
```

## Tech Stack

| Category | Technologies |
|----------|-------------|
| **ML/AI** | scikit-learn, NLTK, TF-IDF, Logistic Regression |
| **NLP** | Tokenization, Stemming, n-grams |
| **Backend** | Python, Flask |
| **Cloud** | GCP Cloud Run, Docker |
| **Data** | Pandas, NumPy |

## Performance Comparison

| Model | Accuracy | F1 Score | Training Time |
|-------|----------|----------|---------------|
| Naive Bayes | 72% | 0.71 | 2s |
| SVM | 89% | 0.88 | 45s |
| Random Forest | 91% | 0.90 | 120s |
| **Logistic Regression** | **95%** | **0.94** | **15s** |

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites
- Python 3.8+
- pip

### Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/Rahul-2k4/Fake_news_Detection.git
cd Fake_news_Detection

# Create virtual environment
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # Windows: venv\Scripts\activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Training the Model

```bash
# Run the complete pipeline
python classifier.py
```

### Making Predictions

```bash
# Interactive prediction
python prediction.py

# Enter a news headline when prompted
> "Scientists discover new planet in solar system"
> Prediction: REAL (Probability: 0.87)
```

## Dataset

Using the **LIAR Dataset** - a benchmark for fake news detection:

- **Source**: ACL 2017 Paper by William Yang Wang
- **Size**: 12,800 labeled statements
- **Classes**: 6 (simplified to 2: Real/Fake)

| Original Label | Mapped To |
|----------------|-----------|
| True, Mostly-true, Half-true | Real |
| Barely-true, False, Pants-fire | Fake |

## Feature Engineering

1. **Text Preprocessing**: Tokenization, lowercasing, stopword removal
2. **TF-IDF Vectorization**: Captures word importance
3. **N-grams**: Unigrams and bigrams for context
4. **Custom Features**: 
   - Sentiment scores
   - Punctuation patterns
   - Capitalization ratio

## Model Selection

After evaluating multiple classifiers using GridSearchCV:

```python
# Best performing model
LogisticRegression(
    C=1.0,
    penalty='l2',
    solver='lbfgs',
    max_iter=1000
)
```

## Deployment

### Local Flask Server

```bash
python front.py
# Access at http://localhost:5000
```

### Docker

```bash
docker build -t fake-news-detector .
docker run -p 5000:5000 fake-news-detector
```

### GCP Cloud Run

```bash
gcloud run deploy fake-news-detector \
  --image gcr.io/PROJECT_ID/fake-news-detector \
  --platform managed \
  --allow-unauthenticated
```

## Project Structure

```
Fake_news_Detection/
├── DataPrep.py           # Data preprocessing
├── FeatureSelection.py   # Feature engineering
├── classifier.py         # Model training & evaluation
├── prediction.py         # CLI prediction interface
├── front.py              # Flask web interface
├── final_model.sav       # Trained model
├── liar_dataset/         # Original dataset
├── images/               # Visualizations
├── requirements.txt
└── README.md
```

## Learning Curves

![Learning Curve](images/LR_LCurve.PNG)

## Future Improvements

- [ ] Deploy to Hugging Face Spaces for live demo
- [ ] Add BERT-based embeddings for better accuracy
- [ ] Implement real-time news verification API
- [ ] Add source credibility scoring

## Citations

```bibtex
@inproceedings{wang2017liar,
  title={"Liar, Liar Pants on Fire": A New Benchmark Dataset for Fake News Detection},
  author={Wang, William Yang},
  booktitle={ACL},
  year={2017}
}
```

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

## Author

**Rahul Tripathi**
- GitHub: [@Rahul-2k4](https://github.com/Rahul-2k4)
- LinkedIn: [rahul-tripathi-335347353](https://linkedin.com/in/rahul-tripathi-335347353)
- Email: rahultripathi7009@gmail.com

---

*Fighting misinformation with machine learning*
